---
title: "Routines for a healthy and happy life (as a software engineer)"
date: 2025-04-18T09:00:00+01:00
tags: ["programming", "softwareengineering", "life"]
draft: false
---

# Introduction

I have always been passionate about productivity. As a dedicated software
engineer, the pursuit of continuous learning and the creation of high-quality,
maintainable code are paramount. However, focusing solely on honing technical
skills while neglecting other facets of life can lead to an imbalance, a state
best described by Kelsey Hightower's insightful observation:

> If you focus too much on technology and technical skills, you'll end up as a
> senior engineer and a junior human being. - Kelsey Hightower

Previously, I've shared [best practices](../habits) concerning coding and
engineering productivity from a technical standpoint. But to unlock even greater
levels of productivity and, more importantly, to cultivate a fulfilling and
purposeful life, we must explore beyond the realm of code. Software engineering
is a significant part of our professional identity, but it does not encompass
the entirety of our being. A well-developed individual embraces a broader
spectrum of interests.

In the following sections, I aim to present the routines, books, and
perspectives that have personally empowered me to lead a healthier, happier, and
more responsible life.

<p align="center">
  <img src="/blog/img/tree_people.jpeg" alt="vicious cycle" class="medium-zoom-image" width="600">
</p>

# Health

### Sports/Calisthenics

Having worked as a software engineer for nearly 20 years, the shift to a
full-time home office in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic brought significant
changes to my daily routine. Staying home predominantly had a notable impact on
my physical well-being. The reduced physical activity led to issues such as back
pain and other related problems. Recognizing the need for change, I realized
that incorporating regular exercise was the key to improvement.

Being naturally inclined towards a less active lifestyle, I opted for
Calisthenics due to its convenience of being primarily home-based. Initially,
adhering to a consistent workout schedule proved challenging. However, regular
exercise has since become an indispensable part of my life. The benefits have
been truly transformative: not only has my back pain subsided, but I also
experience increased energy levels and a stronger immune system. My friends and
colleagues have even remarked on my consistently improved mood.

I highly recommend investing in a guided workout plan that provides a structured
schedule and effective exercises. In my experience,
[Calisthenics Movement](https://www.calimove.com/p/home) stands out as an
excellent program. Their approach is science-backed, and their instructors
possess two decades of expertise. For those unfamiliar,
[Calisthenics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calisthenics) is a form of training
that primarily utilizes body weight for exercises such as push-ups, pull-ups,
and squats.

A word of caution: it's crucial not to overexert yourself at the beginning. Your
joints and tendons need time to adapt to the new demands, and a thorough warm-up
is essential to prevent injuries – a mistake I personally made. As an additional
piece of advice, don't limit your focus solely to strength training.
Incorporating mobility and flexibility sessions is equally important. Good
mobility can significantly alleviate various types of musculoskeletal pain,
including issues in the back, neck, and shoulders.

### Healthy Nutrition

Beyond Calisthenics, a healthy approach to eating is equally crucial. While
nutrition is a vast subject that can feel overwhelming, **the single most
impactful change you can make is to reduce your sugar consumption.** I highly
recommend the book
[Fat Chance: The Hidden Truth About Sugar, Obesity, and Disease](https://www.amazon.de/Fat-Chance-Hidden-Obesity-Disease/dp/000751414X)
by Robert Lustig. This book was truly eye-opening in understanding the
detrimental effects of sugar. It clearly explains the cycles of insulin and
leptin and how sugar disrupts their balance, leading to addiction. Leptin is the
hormone responsible for signaling satiety to our body. Excessive insulin
production, triggered by sugar intake, reduces leptin levels, preventing us from
feeling satisfied. This eventually creates a vicious cycle: the more sugar you
consume, the more your body craves it. The only way to mitigate the insulin
spike caused by sugar is to consume it alongside fiber-rich foods such as
broccoli, oats, and other vegetables and fruits or by reducing your sugar
consumption itself.

By significantly reducing or eliminating sugar from your daily meals, you'll
likely experience increased energy levels, improved alertness, and a more
vibrant feeling overall.

### Sleep

For a healthy life, sufficient and good-quality sleep is indispensable.
[Why We Sleep](https://www.gatesnotes.com/why-we-sleep) by Matthew Walker offers
a fascinating and in-depth exploration of the science behind sleep. In it,
you'll discover valuable insights into establishing healthy sleep habits:

- **Establish a consistent sleep schedule:** Try to go to bed and wake up around
  the same time each day, even on weekends.
- **Avoid stimulating activities before bedtime:** Refrain from activities that
  can overstimulate your brain in the hours leading up to sleep, such as
  exposure to the blue light emitted by smartphones and intense physical
  exercise.
- **Limit alcohol consumption:** Alcohol can suppress the crucial Rapid Eye
  Movement (REM) sleep phase, which is vital for cognitive functions.

Furthermore, a short nap in the afternoon can significantly boost alertness and
enhance creativity. It's particularly important for older individuals to
prioritize sleep, as the body increasingly relies on this recovery period.

# Non-Tech Interests

### Philosophy

As a software engineer who has accumulated years of experience, you naturally
acquire proficiency in numerous programming languages and diverse technologies,
mastering your craft. However, confining oneself solely to this technical domain
can feel limiting, and the constant pursuit of the next trendy technology can
eventually become monotonous. As Kelsey Hightower aptly put it, you risk
becoming a senior developer but remaining a "junior human being." I firmly
believe that studying Philosophy offers a wealth of benefits. It sharpens your
critical thinking and problem-solving abilities. Exposure to a multitude of
perspectives broadens your own viewpoint, expands your horizons, and fosters
open-mindedness. You'll engage in deeper contemplation of crucial topics, such
as the nature of our society, and gain a greater appreciation for the freedoms
and privileges we enjoy in the Western world. The "Age of Enlightenment" stands
as one of the most significant milestones in human history, driven by the
insights of philosophers and intellectuals.

[The Beginning of Infinity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beginning_of_Infinity)
builds upon this very idea, elaborating on how the Enlightenment liberated us
from the constraints of authority and dogmatic thinking. It ushered in an era
where individuals could think for themselves, critically evaluate each other's
ideas, and rigorously refute theories. Knowledge, according to the book, is
inherently infinite because each new discovery invariably unveils further areas
of the unknown. Coupled with the seemingly infinite nature of the universe, this
led David Deutsch to call the Enlightenment "the beginning of infinity."

Beyond philosophy, delving into human history is also profoundly "enlightening".
It cultivates a deeper awareness of our collective achievements and fosters a
sense of gratitude for the present. However, we must not take our free Western
society for granted; the ongoing effort to champion an open society and actively
resist its adversaries is a constant necessity. Karl Popper's seminal work, _The
Open Society and Its Enemies_, offers profound insights into this crucial
matter.

Other books about history I strongly recommend:

- Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind
- Nexus A Brief History of Information Networks
- The Ascent of Man

"Nexus" is a particularly insightful exploration of how information networks
impact our society. It provides a deeper understanding of how both democracies
and tyrannies utilize information channels to achieve their objectives, and also
elucidates why democracies are especially vulnerable to social media and other
mass communication tools. Interestingly, Yuval Noah Harari explains that the
existence of both democracy and totalitarian states is contingent upon the
presence of a mass communication – a fascinating point to consider because we
live more and more in a world dominated by social media.

### Meditation

Another routine that has significantly benefited me is _meditation_. While I
don't practice it professionally, I meditate two or three times a week for about
five minutes. Meditation helps to induce relaxation, and afterwards, I find
myself more alert and able to maintain focus for extended periods. Furthermore,
it effectively reduces stress levels and anxiety. Perhaps even more valuable is
the increased resilience it fosters against negative emotions such as anger and
fear.

Personally, I highly recommend the book
[Shaolin Spirit](https://www.shihengyi.online/shaolin-spirit-book). It provides
an excellent introduction to meditation and also offers insights into profound
life philosophies, specifically Zen and Taoism. The book presents practical ways
to integrate these principles into your daily life, and actively applying them
can noticeably improve your overall well-being.

### Learning How to Learn

_Learning_ stands out as one of life's most crucial skills, making it essential
to invest in honing your learning abilities. Barbara Oakley's book,
[A Mind for Numbers](https://barbaraoakley.com/books/a-mind-for-numbers/),
offers exceptional guidance in this area. She also provides a valuable free
[Coursera Course](https://www.coursera.org/learn/learning-how-to-learn). Both
resources are truly remarkable and will transform your approach to learning and
tackling complex subjects, ultimately making you a more effective learner.

In addition to cultivating a positive learning attitude, developing a _growth
mindset_ is equally important. This is particularly vital for children, as they
need to understand that they can achieve anything through dedicated effort and
time. This perspective contrasts with a static mindset, where individuals
believe in fixed talents and tend to give up early when faced with challenging
skills, thinking they lack inherent ability and will never succeed.

A powerful way to boost your own motivation and discover greater purpose in life
is to teach others. Not only will you deepen your own understanding through the
process of explaining concepts, but you'll also empower others to reach their
goals. This act of sharing knowledge is a wonderful way to forge friendships and
build strong relationships in general.

# Humans/Relationships

All the tips mentioned above focus on the individual – on yourself. However,
humans are social beings and truly thrive when they spend quality time with
family and friends. Therefore, investing in strong relationships with your close
ones is essential. Additionally, be mindful of the company you keep; avoid toxic
and perpetually pessimistic individuals, as they can significantly impact your
well-being. Lastly, consider reading some
[books about leadership and how to be a good team member](../programming-books/#management-and-leadership).
Software development is a collaborative effort, and the most successful software
engineers not only excel technically but also possess strong communication
skills, are excellent team players and mentors, and ultimately, bring optimism
and positive energy to the team.

# Final Words

I hope some of these ideas resonated with you and sparked your interest in at
least one of the topics discussed. Personally, these routines and practices have
had a positive impact on my life. I feel better overall, possess more energy,
and generally maintain a more positive mood. I experience a greater sense of
balance and find myself more resilient when facing various challenges, such as
anxieties about job security or coping with difficult experiences and events.
Beyond feeling better, I also believe I understand the world a bit more clearly,
allowing me to make significantly better decisions in my life (and my job).

Don't forget, where ever you starting point is:

> It's the beginning of infinity.

# References

- [Fat Chance: The Hidden Truth About Sugar, Obesity, and Disease](https://www.amazon.de/Fat-Chance-Hidden-Obesity-Disease/dp/000751414X)
- [Calisthenics Movement](https://www.calimove.com/p/home)
- [A Mind for Numbers - Barbara Oakley](https://barbaraoakley.com/books/a-mind-for-numbers/)
- [Learning How To Learn, Coursera Free Course](https://www.coursera.org/learn/learning-how-to-learn)
- [Shaolin Spirit](https://www.shihengyi.online/shaolin-spirit-book)
- [Why We Sleep](https://www.gatesnotes.com/why-we-sleep)
